---
title: "What's involved in running an Agile team"
date: "2022-04-15"
---

I love my job because among the many things I do, it leads me to enhance and bring out the potential in each member of my team. To summarize: so far, I've had the fortune and the opportunity to work as a Developer and as a Scrum Master in Kanban, Scrum and LeSS organized teams. All ranging in size from 4 to 30 people. On-site as well as remotely. Clearly there are many variables at play.

For example, you have to remember that one of the Agile principles is that the team should be self-managing. But also that it should be cross-functional. All ideas that serve to maximize productivity. What's beautiful, is that you can achieve this ideal form in hundreds of different ways. Because in the end, who makes up the team is the people. Human beings, all different from each other. So each team will have different nuances: there will be those who are more charismatic, those who prefer to work behind the scenes, and those who may be at their first experience, and therefore need to be supported and are not 100% autonomous. And that's totally fine! But the mixture of these factors does not always lead you to be able to reach that ideal entity we were talking about earlier. So? 

In my opinion we have to keep solid the idea that the final deliverable has to be a sort of "opera magna": it will never be perfect, but it has to be as close as possible. And this idea must be reiterable, from Sprint to Sprint. To make this happen, the Scrum Master, Product Owner and Management must be valuable all-around supports. It's not enough for the Scrum Master to facilitate ceremonies. It's not enough for the Product Owner to write and present the stories. It's not enough for Management to make ends meet. It's necessary for everyone to mobilize for a common vision, and to adopt empathetic and encouraging leadership. Let's cut to the chase: what I believe must not be missing is empathy. Business issues often leave little room for understanding, discussion and support. In my opinion, it's a long-term commitment and investment for the team. It will not be understood by everyone at first. But if you take a forward-looking view, it's what will enable the team to seal functional dynamics that will achieve something unique. A valuable artifact that will most likely meet the needs of the end user. 

Are we talking about philosophy? On the surface it could be. I don't think so. This also gives motivation to all the principles of Extreme Programming and Clean Coding. It will be what will make it easier to dispel conflicts. Because they are inevitable, but at the same time they are very important opportunities to grow and improve, provided that there are Scrum Masters and Product Owners able to manage them. And it sounds like a trivial skill, but it's not. It's about as difficult as it gets. But it's also what sets talent apart.

You see, in four paragraphs we talked about everything but also about nothing. So to answer the initial question, what's involved in running an Agile team? It depends: many, many things. One among all, **the beauty of doing things right, with pleasure and with empathy.**