---
title: "What's involved in running an Agile team"
date: "2022-04-15"
---

I love my job because, among many other things, it allows me to develop and bring out the potential in each member of my team. In summary, I've had the good fortune and opportunity to work as a Developer and Scrum Master in Kanban, Scrum and LeSS organized teams. All ranging in size from 4 to 30 people. Both on-site and remote. Obviously there are many variables at play.

For example, it is important to remember that one of the Agile principles is that the team should be self-managing. But also that it should be cross-functional. All of these ideas are there to maximize productivity. The beauty is that you can achieve this ideal in hundreds of different ways. After all, the team is made up of people. People are all different. So every team will have different nuances: there will be those who are more charismatic, those who prefer to work behind the scenes, and those who may be new to the experience and therefore need support and are not 100% autonomous. And that's totally fine! But the mix of these factors does not always result in you being able to reach that ideal entity we were talking about earlier.

In my opinion, we have to hold on to the idea that the final result has to be a kind of "opera magna": it will never be perfect, but it has to be as close as possible. And this idea must be repeatable from sprint to sprint. To make this happen, the Scrum Master, Product Owner and Management must be valuable all-round supporters. It's not enough for the Scrum Master to facilitate ceremonies. It's not enough for the Product Owner to write and present the stories. It's not enough for management to make ends meet. It's necessary for everyone to mobilize around a common vision and provide empathetic and encouraging leadership. 

Let's cut to the chase: I believe the one thing that cannot be lacking is empathy. Business issues often leave little room for understanding, discussion, and support. In my opinion, it's a long-term commitment and investment for the team. Not everyone will understand it at first. But if you take a forward-looking view, it's what will enable the team to seal a functional dynamic that will achieve something unique. A valuable artifact that will most likely meet the needs of the end user.

Are we talking about philosophy? On the surface, we might be. I don't think so. This is what motivates all the principles of Extreme Programming and Clean Coding. It will make it easier to resolve conflicts. Because they are inevitable, but at the same time they are very important opportunities to grow and improve, provided there are Scrum Masters and Product Owners who are able to manage them. And it sounds like a trivial skill, but it's not. It's about as hard as it gets. But it's also what distinguishes talent.

You see, in four paragraphs we have talked about everything, but also nothing. So to answer the original question, what does it take to run an agile team? It depends on many, many things. One of them is the beauty of doing things right, with joy and empathy.